---
layout: post
title: "Collections"
description: "Terms"
categories: [Collection]
tags: [Links, Latex]
redirect_from:
  - /2021/12/21/
---

<head>
    <script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
        MathJax.Hub.Config({
            tex2jax: {
            skipTags: ['script', 'noscript', 'style', 'textarea', 'pre'],
            inlineMath: [['$','$']]
            }
        });
    </script>
</head>

**[Bilinear interpolation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bilinear_interpolation)**. Bilinear interpolation is performed using linear interpolation first in one direction, and then again in the other direction. Although each step is linear in the sampled values and in the position, the interpolation as a whole is not linear but rather quadratic in the sample location.

**[mixture model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixture_model)**. In statistics, a mixture model is a probabilistic model for representing the presence of subpopulations within an overall population, without requiring that an observed data set should identify the sub-population to which an individual observation belongs. Formally a mixture model corresponds to the mixture distribution that represents the probability distribution of observations in the overall population. However, while problems associated with "mixture distributions" relate to deriving the properties of the overall population from those of the sub-populations, "mixture models" are used to make statistical inferences about the properties of the sub-populations given only observations on the pooled population, without sub-population identity information.

**[simplex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplex)**. In geometry, a simplex (plural: simplexes or simplices) is a generalization of the notion of a triangle or tetrahedron to arbitrary dimensions. The simplex is so-named because it represents the simplest possible polytope in any given space. For example,

- a 0-simplex is a point,
- a 1-simplex is a line segment,
- a 2-simplex is a triangle,
- a 3-simplex is a tetrahedron,
- a 4-simplex is a 5-cell.

The simplex determined by them is the set of points:

$$
C=\left\{\sum_{i=0}^k\theta_iu_i\Bigg\vert\sum_{i=0}^k\theta_i=1\textbf{ and }\theta_i\ge0\textbf{ for } i=0,...,k\right\}
$$

**[canonical correlation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canonical_correlation)**. In statistics, canonical-correlation analysis (CCA), also called canonical variates analysis, is a way of inferring information from cross-covariance matrices.

[SIX KEY CHARACTERISTICS of quality DATA](https://www.bdex.com/why-is-data-completeness-important/):

1. **Accuracy**: Is the information false?
2. **Completeness**: Are there gaps in the data?
3. **Reliability**: Is the data contradictory?
4. **Timeliness**: Is the information up to date?
5. **Relevance**: How applicable is the data to what you’re trying to do?
6. **Availability**: Is the data accessible to those who need it?

---

How to print $\Big\vert$ instead of $\vert$ in LATEX?

```latex
\big\vert
\Big\vert
\bigg\vert
\Bigg\vert
```

> the vertical line goes longer with the codes above
