---
layout: post
title: "StatQuest(ML) Odds Ratios and Log(Odds Ratios)"
description: "StatQuest(ML) Odds Ratios and Log(Odds Ratios)"
categories: [Machine Learning, StatQuest with Josh Starmer]
tags: [Machine Learning, StatQuest with Josh Starmer]
redirect_from:  
  - /2021/06/20/
---

<head>
    <script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>
    <script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
        MathJax.Hub.Config({
            tex2jax: {
            skipTags: ['script', 'noscript', 'style', 'textarea', 'pre'],
            inlineMath: [['$','$']]
            }
        });
    </script>
</head>

When people say "odds radio", they are talking about a "ratio of odds". So we've got

$$
\frac{a\ ratio\ of\ one\ odds...}{...to\ another\ odds.}
$$

Just like when we calculate the odds of something, if the denominator is larger than the numerator, the odds ratio will go from 0 to 1, and if the numerator is larger than the denominator, then the odds ratio will go from 1 to infinity (and beyond!)...

...and just like the odds, taking the log of the odds ratio (i.e. $log(odds ratio)$) makes things nice and symmetrical.

## Odds Ratio in Action

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;
  overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;
  font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-c3ow{border-color:inherit;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg" style="undefined;table-layout: fixed; width: 215px">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 60px">
<col style="width: 33px">
<col style="width: 58px">
<col style="width: 64px">
</colgroup>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-c3ow" colspan="2" rowspan="2"></th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow" colspan="2">Has Cancer</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Yes</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">No</td>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="2">Has the mutated gene</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Yes</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">23</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">117</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">No</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">6</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">210</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

We can use an "odds ratio" to determine if there is a relationship between the mutated gene and cancer. If someone has the mutated gene, are the odds higher that they will get cancer?

$$
\begin{aligned}
odds\ ratio&=\frac{\frac{23}{117}}{\frac{6}{210}}=6.88 \\
log(odds\ ratio)&=log(6.88)=1.93
\end{aligned}
$$

**The odds ratio and the log(odds ratio) are like R-squared;** they indicate a relationship between two things (in this case, a relationship between the mutated gene and cancer), and just like R-squared, the values correspond to effect size.

- Larger values mean that the mutated gene **is a good predictor** of cancer.
- Smaller values mean that the mutated gene **is not a good predictor** of cancer.

There are **3 ways** to determine if an odds ratio (or log(odds ratio)) is statistically significant.

1. Fisher's Exact Test
2. Chi-Square Test
3. The Wald Test

There is no general consensus on which method is best and people often mix and match.

> - Some people will use Fisher's exact test or Chi-Square Test to calculate the p-value, and use The Wald Test to calculate a confidence interval.
> - Some people are happy to let Wald do all the work - calculate the p-value and the confidence interval.
> - The last method ensures that the p-value and confidence interval will always be consistent, but check and see what other folks do in your field to find out what is most acceptable. 
